>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JUNE 21...
THOUSANDS FLOCK TO MOTHER
EMANUEL CHURCH IN CHARLESTON
FOR ITS FIRST SERVICE SINCE A
GUNMAN KILLED NINE PARISHIONERS.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
FROM ISRAEL, A NEW WAVE OF ARAB
LAWMAKERS PLEDGE TO IMPROVE THE
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
OF ISRAEL'S ARAB MINORITY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IN CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA,
THIS MORNING, MOTHER EMANUEL
CHURCH WAS FILLED TO CAPACITY
AND HUNDREDS MORE GATHERED
OUTSIDE FOR THE FIRST SERVICE
SINCE THE MASS SHOOTING THAT
TOOK THE LIVES OF NINE
PARISHIONERS WEDNESDAY.
>> WE ASK, OH GOD, THAT YOU WILL
GUIDE AND DIRECT AND STRENGTHEN
THOSE FAMILIES WHO HAVE BEEN
VICTIMIZED BY THAT HORRIBLE
SITUATION.
>> Sreenivasan: CLERGY CALLED
FOR SOLACE, BUT ALSO FOR
ACCOUNTABILITY.
>> WE'RE GOING TO PURSUE JUSTICE
AND WE'RE GOING TO BE VIGILANT
AND WE ARE GOING TO HOLD OUR
ELECTED OFFICIALS AND OTHERS
ACCOUNTABLE TO DO THE RIGHT
THING.
>> Sreenivasan: CHURCHES ACROSS
CHARLESTON RANG THEIR BELLS IN
UNISON, AS A SIGN OF SOLIDARITY.
LAST EVENING, HUNDREDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS MARCHED PEACEFULLY
THROUGH CHARLESTON, PROTESTING
RACISM AND MOURNING THE DEATHS
OF THE NINE SHOOTING VICTIMS.
AT THE END OF THE MARCH,
DEMONSTRATORS HUNG BANNERS WITH
THE NAMES OF THE VICTIMS ON THE
DAUGHTERS OF THE CONFEDERACY
BUILDING.
AT ANOTHER RALLY IN COLUMBIA,
THE STATE CAPITAL, PROTESTERS
DEMANDED THAT THE STATE
LEGISLATURE REMOVE THE
CONFEDERATE BATTLE FLAG.
TALK OF THE FLAG DOMINATED THE
SUNDAY TALK SHOWS.
ON ABC's "THIS WEEK," SOUTH
CAROLINA LEGISLATOR AND PASTOR
CARL ANDERSON SAID HE WILL
SUPPORT A BILL TO REMOVE THE
FLAG WHEN STATE LAWMAKERS
RECONVENE EARLY NEXT YEAR.
>> IT WILL BE A BIPARTISAN BILL
FOR US TO MOVE THAT CONFEDERATE
FLAG, PUT IT IN A MUSEUM
SOMEWHERE IN COLUMBIA, WHERE IT
WILL BE OFF OF THE STATE CAPITOL
GROUNDS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE NATIONAL
HEAD OF THE N.A.A.C.P. CORNELL
WILLIAM BROOKS TOLD CBS NEWS'
FACE THE NATION THE CONFEDERATE
FLAG REPRESENTS BIGOTRY.
>> THERE ARE WHITE NATIONALIST
GROUPS ACROSS THE COUNTRY WHO
SEE THAT FLAG AS REPRESENTING
THEIR VALUES.
IT'S AN ANACHRONISTIC EMBLEM OF
A BYGONE ERA AT BEST, AND MOST
LIKELY AND MOST REPRESENTATIVE
OF A SET OF VALUES THAT RUN
CONTRADICTORY, THAT RUN COUNTER
TO WHO WE ARE AS AMERICANS.
IT HAS TO COME DOWN, IT MUST
COME DOWN.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT ON THE SAME
BROADCAST, SOUTH CAROLINA
REPUBLICAN SENATOR TIM SCOTT
WOULD NOT SAY IF HE WANTED THE
FLAG TO STAY OR GO.
>> I AM LOOKING FORWARD TO OUR
STATE LEADERS GETTING TOGETHER
AND HAVING A ROBUST CONVERSATION
AFTER THE FUNERALS ABOUT WHAT'S
THE NEXT STEP.
>> Sreenivasan: FORMER
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE MITT ROMNEY CALLED FOR
REMOVING THE FLAG FROM THE STATE
CAPITOL GROUNDS IN A TWEET, BUT
SOME CURRENT PRESIDENTIAL
REPUBLICAN CONTENDERS SAY IT IS
AN ISSUE FOR SOUTH CAROLINIANS
TO SORT OUT.
CANDIDATE AND FORMER SENATOR
RICK SANTORUM SAID AS MUCH TO
ABC'S MARTHA RADDATZ.
>> I TAKE THE POSITION THAT THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS NO ROLE
IN THIS.
>> BUT YOU'RE A CANDIDATE, YOU
TAKE NO POSITION?
>> I'M NOT A SOUTH CAROLINIAN,
THESE ARE DECISIONS TO BE MADE.
I DON'T THINK FEDERAL CANDIDATES
SHOULD BE MAKING DECISIONS OR
OPINING.
>> Sreenivasan: LIKE MANY ALL
BLACK CHURCHES IN THE SOUTH,
CHARLESTON'S A.M.E. CHURCH HAS
FACED RACIALLY MOTIVATED
VIOLENCE THROUGHOUT ITS 200-YEAR
HISTORY, FORCING ITS DOORS TO BE
SHUT SEVERAL TIMES.
NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: IT'S ONE OF THE
MOST HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS IN THE
SOUTH WITH A FORMATION IS
CLOSELY TIED TO CHARLESTON'S
HISTORY AS A MAJOR SLAVE TRADE
PORT.
IN THE EARLY 1800S A FREED SLAVE
LEFT HIS METHODIST CHURCH IN
PROTEST OF DISCRIMINATORY RULES
AGAINST ITS BLACK MEMBERS.
MORRIS BROWN BECAME THE FIRST
ORDAINED MINISTER OF THE AFRICAN
METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH AND
ALIGNED THE GROUP WITH THE "FREE
AFRICAN SOCIETY" FOUNDED THREE
DECADES EARLIER IN
DECADES EARLIER IN PHILADELPHIA.
THOUSANDS OF THE CHARLESTON'S
BLACK WORSHIPPERS FOLLOWED HIM.
IN 1822 THE BUILDING WAS BURNED
DOWN BY AN ANGRY MOB OF WHITE
SUPREMACISTS AFTER CHURCH
LEADERS WERE ACCUSED OF TRYING
TO ORGANIZE A SLAVE REVOLT, FOR
WHICH DOZENS OF THE ACCUSED WERE
TRIED AND EXECUTED.
IN 1834, SOUTH CAROLINA OUTLAWED
ALL BLACK CHURCHES, FORCING THE
CONGREGATION TO GO UNDERGROUND
UNTIL THE END OF THE CIVIL WAR.
AFTER REORGANIZING, THE CHURCH
ADDED THE WORD "EMANUEL" TO ITS
NAME, HEBREW FOR "GOD IS WITH
US".
IN 1886 THE BUILDING WAS RAVAGED
BY AN EARTHQUAKE AND REBUILT
FIVE YEARS LATER WITH THE NOW
ICONIC STEEPLE.
IN THE YEARS THAT FOLLOWED
LUMINARIES SUCH AS BOOKER T.
WASHINGTON AND MARTIN LUTHER
KING JR. VISITED THE CHURCH.
AND TODAY, ONCE AGAIN FOLLOWING
AN ACT OF VIOLENCE, THE CHURCH
HAS REOPENED ITS DOORS,
MAINTAINING ITS POSITION AS
BEACON OF COMFORT AND STRENGTH
FOR THE CITY'S BLACK POPULATION.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW TO GREECE,
WHERE PRIME MINISTER ALEXIS
TSIPRAS IS RUNNING OUT OF TIME
TO SAVE HIS COUNTRY FROM
POTENTIAL ECONOMIC COLLAPSE.
TSIPRAS WILL MAKE HIS CASE FOR
FINANCIAL RELIEF AT AN EMERGENCY
EUROZONE SUMMIT TOMORROW, HOPING
TO HEAD OFF A LOOMING ONE-POINT-
SIX BILLION EURO DEBT PAYMENT
WHICH IS DUE BY JUNE 30TH.
WALL STREET JOURNAL REPORTER IAN
TALLEY JOINS ME TO EXPLAIN
WHAT'S AT STAKE IN THESE
NEGOTIATIONS.
>> SO IAN, WE ALL KIND OF HAVE
THIS DEBT FATIGUE, THIS CYCLE,
GROSS IS ON THE BRINK, GREECE IS
NOT ON THE BRINK.
HOW SIGNIFICANTLY IS THIS?
>> TOMORROW IS A CRITICAL
JUNCTURE.
A FAILURE TO GET AGREEMENT AFTER
MONTHS OF NEGOTIATIONS.
WHAT'S AT STAKE IS A FAILED
STATE IN EUROPE.
AT STAKE IS POTENTIAL FINANCIAL
CONTAGION.
SOME PEOPLE SAY EUROPE IS BETTER
PREPARED BUT AS BEN BERNANKE
SAID, THE FINANCES WEREN'T
REALLY AT HANDS BEFORE THE
FINANCIAL CRISIS NO ONE KNOWS
HOW BAD THINGS COULD GET.
>> WE SAW VIDEO OF PEOPLE TAKING
OUT MONEY FROM ATMs ABOUT
WHAT'S SO UNCERTAIN WHAT'S GOING
TO HAPPEN TOMORROW.
>> YEAH.
I THINK IF THERE'S A DECISION
TOMORROW, A DEAL THEN THERE
COULD BE A SLOW UNWINDING OF THE
CRISIS OVER THE MONTHS.
BUT FEW PEOPLE ARE GIVING THAT
DEAL A -- GOOD ODDS.
MORE LIKELY IS FAILURE TO GET
AGREEMENT AND TUESDAY COMES
ALONG AND THERE'S BASICALLY
FINANCIAL MARTIAL LAW IMPOSED.
CAPITAL CONTROLS SO THAT FRANTIC
CUSTOMERS, MARKETS, DEPOSITORS
CAN'T TAKE THEIR CASH OUT EN
MASSE WHICH WOULD PUT GREECE
ALREADY IN A CRISIS INTO A
FINANCIAL MAELSTROM.
>> WHAT HAPPENS WITH THEIRS
POSITION IN THE EURO ZONE IF
THIS DEBT DEAL DOESN'T GOES
THROUGH?
>> MANY HAVE BEEN WARNING OF A
FINANCIAL EXIT.
NO ONE'S RULING THAT OUT.
AT THE SAME TIME, THERE ARE
OTHER POSSIBILITIES THAT GREECE
COULD ISSUE IOU'S DENOMINATED IN
EUROS, THEY COULD KEEP IT WITHIN
THE EURO ZONE, STILL HAVING A
FINANCIAL AND POLITICAL CRISIS.
THERE IS VERY MUCH A RISK OF A
GREEK EXIT.
I THINK ANOTHER WORRY ABOUT NOT
JUST GREECE EXITING IS THAT
BEING THE FIRST DOMINO OF OTHER
POLITICAL FACTIONS GAINING
GROUND IN EUROPE THAT ALSO WANT
TO LEAVE EUROPE.
YOU COULD SEE THE BEGINNING OF
THE END OF THE MONETARY UNION AS
WE KNOW IT.
THOUGH MANY ANALYSTS AND
ECONOMISTS SAY, THAT IS NOT THE
LIKELIEST OPTION.
THERE IS STILL A DESIRE IN
GREECE, THERE IS STILL A DESIRE
IN EUROPE TO HOLD THAT MONETARY
UNION TOGETHER.
SO WHILE TOMORROW IS A CRITICAL
JUNCTURE IT IS NOT THE COMPLETE
END-GAME.
>> ALL RIGHT, IAN TALLEY, FROM
THE WALL STREET JOURNAL JOINING
US FROM WASHINGTON, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: AND TONIGHT, IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, WE TAKE
YOU TO ISRAEL, WHERE A CLOSE AND
CONTENTIOUS ELECTION THIS SPRING
PROVIDED PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU WITH A FOURTH TERM IN
OFFICE, AND BROUGHT IN A NEW
WAVE OF ARAB LAWMAKERS, UNITING
AS A VOTING BLOC CALLED "THE
JOINT LIST".
IT'S THE FIRST TIME ARAB
LAWMAKERS FROM DIFFERENT PARTIES
HAVE JOINED TOGETHER.
THEY'VE PLEDGED TO IMPROVE THE
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
OF ISRAEL'S ARAB MINORITY.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MARTIN FLETCHER HAS THE STORY.
>> Reporter: ISRAEL'S HOME TO
MORE THAN EIGHT MILLION PEOPLE,
AND WHILE IT'S KNOWN AS A JEWISH
STATE, ONE IN FIVE IS ARAB:
MUSLIMS AND CHRISTIANS.
THE LARGEST MINORITY GROUP IN
THE COUNTRY, ARAB ISRAELIS HAVE
FEW LEADERSHIP ROLES IN THE
COUNTRY'S SOCIAL AND GOVERNMENT
INSTITUTIONS, AND ECONOMICALLY,
THEY TRAIL FAR BEHIND THE JEWISH
MAJORITY.
NEARLY HALF OF ISRAEL'S ARABS
LIVE IN POVERTY.
GUY BEN-PORAT STUDIES MINORITY
ISSUES AT ISRAEL'S BEN-GURION
UNIVERSITY.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT TODAY, AFTER
ARAB POLITICAL PARTIES JOINED
FORCES AND THEN CAPTURED 13 OF
THE ISRAELI PARLIAMENT'S 120
SEATS, A NEW GENERATION OF ARAB
LAWMAKERS WANTS TO CHANGE
THINGS.
IN HIS VERY FIRST SPEECH TO
ISRAEL'S PARLIAMENT, OR KNESSET,
NEWLY-ELECTED MEMBER YOUSEF
JABAREEN CALLED FOR MORE
EQUALITY FOR ISRAELI ARABS: MORE
ACCEPTANCE OF ARAB CULTURE, MORE
JEWISH-ARAB DIALOGUE ON
CAMPUSES, AND ABOVE ALL, AN ARAB
UNIVERSITY.
>> I MYSELF, YOU KNOW I'M AN
ACADEMIC, I'M A PROFESSIONAL,
I'M AN EXPERT IN EDUCATIONAL
ISSUES, BUT I HAVE ZERO
INFLUENCE ON THE CURRICULUM IN,
YOU KNOW, ON THE ISSUES THAT MY
KIDS ARE BEING TAUGHT AT THE
ARAB SCHOOLS.
>> Reporter: AIDA TOUMA-SLIMAN,
ANOTHER NEW ARAB MEMBER OF
PARLIAMENT AND THE FIRST ARAB IN
ISRAEL'S HISTORY TO CHAIR A
PERMANENT PARLIAMENTARY
COMMITTEE, SAYS SHE'LL EMPHASIZE
WOMEN'S RIGHTS.
>> Reporter: MARK REGEV IS PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU'S
LONG-TIME SPOKESMAN.
AND HE SAYS THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT
THE ISRAELI GOVERNMENT WANTS,
TOO.
>> I AGREE MORE NEEDS TO BE
DONE.
WE'RE WORKING ON EDUCATION BOTH
FOR MEN AND FOR WOMEN.
WE'RE WORKING ON INVESTMENT AND
ENCOURAGING TAX BREAKS FOR
PEOPLE TO INVEST IN THE ARAB
SECTOR.
WE DID A PUBLIC CAMPAIGN SPENT
BY TAXPAYERS' MONEY ENCOURAGING
EMPLOYERS TO EMPLOY ISRAELI
ARABS.
WE ARE FULLY COMMITTED TO SEEING
THOSE ISRAELI ARABS, THE ISRAELI
ARAB COMMUNITY, AS A FULL
PARTICIPANT IN THE ECONOMY.
>> Reporter: AS CITIZENS, ARAB
ISRAELIS ARE GUARANTEED THE SAME
LEGAL RIGHTS AS THE JEWISH
MAJORITY.
BUT THE NEW ARAB LEADERSHIP IN
PARLIAMENT SAYS JUST SPENDING
MONEY WON'T SOLVE THE DEEPER
ISSUES OF INEQUALITY.
>> Reporter: THE ISRAELI ARABS,
OR AS SOME OF THEM PREFER TO BE
CALLED, PALESTINIANS LIVING IN
ISRAEL, ARE THE DESCENDANTS OF
THE 150,000 ARABS WHO REMAINED
IN ISRAEL IN 1948 FOLLOWING
ISRAEL'S WAR OF INDEPENDENCE,
WHAT SOME ARABS CALL THE NAQBA,
THE CATASTROPHE.
TODAY THERE ARE ONE POINT SEVEN
MILLION ARABS HERE, 20% OF THE
POPULATION.
YET ONLY 8% OF GOVERNMENT
EMPLOYEES ARE ARABS.
ARABS HAVE ONLY 3% OF JOBS IN
ACADEMIA.
ONLY 2% OF ARAB COMPUTER SCIENCE
GRADUATES FOUND WORK IN HIGH-
TECH, ONE OF THE MAIN DRIVERS OF
ISRAEL'S ECONOMY.
THE PRIME MINISTER'S SPOKESMAN
MARK REGEV INSISTS THAT DESPITE
THEIR PROBLEMS IN ISRAEL,
ISRAELI ARABS STILL HAVE IT FAR
BETTER THAN OTHER ARABS IN THE
MIDDLE EAST.
>> I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
LOOK AT THE FULL-- THE HALF
GLASS THAT'S FULL.
I MEAN LET'S REMEMBER THAT
ISRAELI ARABS ARE THE ONLY ARABS
IN AN ENTIRE VAST REGION OF THE
GREATER MIDDLE EAST THAT HAVE
CONSISTENTLY ENJOYED FULL,
DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS: THE RIGHT TO
VOTE, THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF
RELIGION, FREEDOM OF
ORGANIZATION AND SO FORTH.
RIGHTS THAT THEIR NEIGHBORS IN
THE SURROUNDING ARAB COUNTRIES
UNFORTUNATELY COULD ONLY DREAM
OF.
>> Reporter: SINCE ISRAEL'S
FIRST ELECTIONS IN 1949, ARAB
CITIZENS HAVE HELD SEATS IN THE
COUNTRY'S PARLIAMENT.
BUT THEY'VE NEVER BEEN PART OF A
GOVERNING COALITION AND UNTIL
THIS ELECTION, THEY WERE
SPLINTERED ACROSS A RANGE OF
POLITICAL FACTIONS.
THIS SPRING, HOWEVER, FOUR ARAB
ISRAELI PARTIES RAN A UNIFIED
CAMPAIGN.
THEIR COALITION DREW
INTERNATIONAL ATTENTION AND SOME
ANALYSTS SAID ARABS MIGHT
FINALLY HAVE A SEAT AT THE
TABLE.
BUT ON ELECTION DAY PRIME
MINISTER NETANYAHU CALLED ON HIS
SUPPORTERS TO COME TO THE POLLS
BECAUSE, QUOTE, "ARABS ARE
VOTING IN DROVES."
HIS COMMENTS WERE WIDELY
DENOUNCED.
PRESIDENT OBAMA CALLED THEM,
QUOTE, "CONTRARY TO WHAT IS THE
BEST OF ISRAEL'S TRADITIONS."
>> HE PUBLICLY APOLOGIZED FOR
HIS REMARKS, WHICH WERE
MISINTERPRETED.
HE HAS A CONSISTENT RECORD.
AND WE ARE FULLY COMMITTED TO
SEEING COMPLETE EQUALITY OF OUR
CITIZENS.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT ALL
ISRAELIS, ARAB ISRAELIS TOO,
FEEL THAT ISRAEL IS THEIR HOME.
>> Reporter: BUT FOR SOME ARAB
CITIZENS OF ISRAEL, LIKE ARAB
ACTRESS AND ARTIST RAIDA ADON,
ISRAEL CAN FEEL LIKE A FOREIGN
LAND.
ADON'S VIDEO ARTWORK IS FEATURED
IN A GALLERY IN THE TOWN OF UM
EL FAHEM.
IT'S A PART OF ISRAEL KNOWN AS
THE ARAB TRIANGLE, A STRING OF
ISRAELI ARAB TOWNS AND VILLAGES
CLOSE TO THE WEST BANK BORDER.
WITH FIFTY THOUSAND PEOPLE, UM
EL FAHEM IS ISRAEL'S SECOND
LARGEST ARAB TOWN.
RAIDA ADON'S FILM DEPICTS THE
ARAB REFUGEE EXODUS IN 1948.
BUT HER MESSAGE IS FOR TODAY.
>> YOU CANNOT LISTEN TO THEIR
SCREAMS.
THERE'S NO ONE HEAR THEIR
AND THAT'S THE SITUATION HERE.
NO ONE HEAR US.
NO ONE SEEN US.
WHEN I'M TALKING WITH THE JEWS,
I'M NOT SAY TO THEM THAT YOU ARE
JEALOUS, YOU MAKE THIS, YOU TAKE
MY LAND, YOU TAKE, NO.
I WANT HIM JUST TO LISTEN TO MY
SORROW.
I WANT HIM TO RESPECT MY
IDENTITY AND TO RESPECT MY
LANGUAGE AND TO RESPECT
EVERYTHING THAT I AM DOING LIKE
I RESPECT HIM.
>> Reporter: INSTEAD, A RIGHT-
WING CAMPAIGN AD DURING ISRAEL'S
MARCH ELECTIONS RESURRECTED A
LONG-RUNNING THREAT TO EXPEL
SOME RESIDENTS OF THE ARAB
TRIANGLE.
ARIEL TO ISRAEL, UM EL FAHEM TO
PALESTINE, THE SLOGAN GOES.
MEANING, THE LAND OF SOME WEST
BANK JEWISH SETTLEMENTS BECOMES
PART OF ISRAEL, AND UM EL FAHEM
AND OTHER ARAB TOWNS AND
VILLAGES BECOME PART OF A FUTURE
PALESTINE.
UNDER THE PROPOSAL ABOUT 300,000
ISRAELI ARABS WOULD LOSE THEIR
ISRAELI CITIZENSHIP.
THIS IS BAART'A, ONE OF THE
TOWNS UNDER THREAT.
IT SOUNDS SIMPLE.
>> Reporter: THE BORDER BETWEEN
ISRAEL AND THE WEST BANK RUNS
RIGHT THROUGH THIS STONE OVER
HERE, THE SO-CALLED GREEN LINE.
THE PROPOSAL IS THAT THE ARABS
WHO LIVE ON THIS SIDE OF THIS
STONE, WHICH IS ISRAEL, BECOME
MEMBERS OF A FUTURE PALESTINIAN
STATE ON THIS SIDE OF THE LINE.
THE PROPOSAL MIGHT HAVE BEEN
CAMPAIGN SLOGANEERING-- MOST
ANALYSTS CONSIDER THE SWAP IDEA
A NON-STARTER.
BUT SOME ARABS CALL IT A MOVE TO
DE-LEGITIMIZE THEIR CITIZENSHIP.
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU DOESN'T
SUPPORT THE SWAP PLAN.
AND SPOKESMAN MARK REGEV SAYS
THE GOVERNMENT HAS SPENT ONE AND
A HALF BILLION DOLLARS OVER THE
LAST FIVE YEARS TO HELP CLOSE
THE GAP BETWEEN ARAB AND OTHER
CITIZENS.
THAT'S $200 PER PERSON PER YEAR,
SPENT ON.
>> EDUCATION, HEALTH CARE,
HOUSING, OTHER SERVICES FOR THE
ARAB COMMUNITY SPECIFICALLY TO
NARROW THOSE GAPS, WHICH ARE
UNACCEPTABLE QUITE FRANKLY.
>> Reporter: BUT THAT'S NOWHERE
NEAR ENOUGH, SAYS ODETTE HILWI,
WHO RUNS A SCHOOL IN THE
NORTHERN TOWN OF ACRE ON
ISRAEL'S COAST, FUNDED BY AN
NGO, PAYMENTS FROM PARENTS WHO
CAN AFFORD IT, AND SMALL
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES.
SHE SAYS ARAB ISRAELI DAYCARE
CENTERS DON'T HAVE ENOUGH MONEY,
SCHOOLS DON'T HAVE ENOUGH
CLASSROOMS, AND ALL THAT MEANS
ARAB ISRAELI CHILDREN GET A
WORSE EDUCATION THAN JEWISH
CHILDREN.
>> (translated): IF THERE
WOULD BE MONEY I WOULD OPEN A
KIDS CLUB HERE, BUT WE NEED
MONEY, A PLACE TO HELP WITH
HOMEWORK AND TO PLAY.
>> Reporter: BACK IN THE
PARLIAMENT, ARAB LAWMAKERS
AGREE.
THEY SAY A LOT MORE IS NEEDED
THAN JUST TALK.
>> Sreenivasan: IN HONOR OF
FATHER'S DAY, LEARN MORE ABOUT
HOW PAID PATERNITY LEAVE
COMPARES FOR DADS ACROSS THE
GLOBE.
VIEW OUR INTERACTIVE ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: A NEW U.N.
REPORT REVEALS THAT THE WORLD'S
REFUGEE CRISIS IS GETTING WORSE.
THESE NUMBERS HAVE GROWN TO 59.5
MILLION, A 40% INCREASE WITHIN A
SPAN OF JUST THREE YEARS.
ACCORDING TO THE REPORT, THE
THAT'S THE EQUIVALENT OF THE
ENTIRE POPULATION OF ITALY,
EITHER FLEEING WAR ZONES, ETHNIC
OR POLITICAL PERSECUTION.
FOR SOME INSIGHT ON THE CRISIS,
YESTERDAY I SPOKE WITH SOMINI
SENGUPTA OF THE NEW YORK TIMES.
I BEGAN BY ASKING HER TO PUT THE
60 MILLION IN PERSPECTIVE.
>> WHAT THAT MEANS IS, OF THOSE
60 MILLION, ABOUT 14 MILLION OF
THEM WERE FORCED TO FLEE IN THE
LAST YEAR.
AND THE REST HAVE JUST BEEN
STUCK.
BECAUSE THE CONFLICTS IN THEIR
HOME LANDS HAVE NOT SUBSIDED.
AT ALL.
AND SOME OF THEM ARE STUCK FOR
GENERATIONS.
>> SO WE'RE NOT JUST TALKING
ABOUT POVERTY OR ECONOMIC
OPPORTUNITY PEOPLE CHOOSING TO
LEAVE BUT THESE ARE PEOPLE WHO
ARE FORCED TO LEAVE.
>> ABSOLUTELY NOT.
YES.
THERE'S A BIG DIFFERENCE WHO THE
UNITED NATIONS CALLS REFUGEES OR
DISPLACED PEOPLE.
THEY ARE FLEEING WAR OR
PERSECUTION.
THEY ARE NOT PEOPLE WHO ARE
LEAVING HOME TO FIND A BETTER
LIFE ABROAD LIKE MY PARENTS DID,
LIKE MANY AMERICANS DID.
THESE ARE PEOPLE BEING FORCED TO
FLEE.
THEY THINK THEY'RE ONLY GOING TO
GO AWAY FOR A COUPLE OF MONTHS
BUT THEY ARE STUCK IN A REFUGEE
CAMP WHERE THEY LACK PROPER FOOD
OR WATER, OFTEN THEIR KIDS ARE
NOT IN SCHOOL FOR YEARS AT A
TIME.
>> OKAY AND WHERE ARE SOME OF
THESE PATHWAYS HAPPENING, WHERE
ARE THE COUNTRIES THAT ARE
CREATING THE REFUGEES AND WHERE
DO THEY LAND?
>> SYRIA REMAINS FOR THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS THE LARGEST
SINGLE DRIVER OF THIS.
THERE ARE 7.9 MILLION SYRIANS
WHO ARE DISPLACED.
SOME OF THEM ARE STILL INSIDE
SYRIA BUT MANY HAVE LEFT IN THE
NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES.
TURKEY IS TODAY THE NUMBER ONE
HOSTING COUNTRY THERE ARE 1.5
MILLION SYRIANS IN TURKEY.
>> IT IS A STRAIN ON TURKEY.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
TURKEY, LEN -- LEBANON, JORDAN.
JORDAN, WATER SCARCE, CAUSES A
LOT OF TENSION NECESSARY THOSE
COUNTRIES SOMETIMES.
ONE OF THE REVEALING THINGS IN
THIS REPORT IS THAT ONE IN FOUR
DISPLACED PEOPLE ONE IN FOUR
REFUGEES ARE ACTUALLY IN THE
POOREST COUNTRIES IN THE WORLD.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, ETHIOPIA, ONE OF
THE POOREST NATIONS ON EARTH HAS
SOMETHING LIKE 600,000 REFUGEES.
>> THAT DOESN'T HAVE THE
INFRASTRUCTURE TO SUPPORT THEM
IN THE FIRST PLACE.
>> NOT AT ALL.
>> YOU HAVE MENTIONED THE
REACTIONS HAVE BEEN DIFFERENT IN
DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE WORLD.
EUROPE IS TIGHTENING, WE HAVE
SEEN THE BOAT PEOPLE ACROSS THE
MEDITERRANEAN, THE TRAGEDIES,
AND THE BOATS THAT HAVE BEEN
SUNK OR SINKING.
WHAT IS EUROPE STRUGGLING WITH
COMPARED TO TURKEY TAKES 1 MUCH
6 -- 1.6 MILLION SO FAR RIGHT?
>> IF THEY CAN SETTLE AMONG
THEIR 28 MEMBER STATES, 40,000
REFUGEES, VERSUS 600,000 IN
ETHIOPIA ITSELF.
>> THE LONG TERM IMPACT, EXPLAIN
THAT.
>> THE LONG TERM ASPECT CAN BE
ESPECIALLY HARD, FOR WOMEN AND
CHILDREN.
CHILDREN DON'T GO TO SCHOOL FOR
YEARS.
IN SYRIA HIGH LEVEL OF LIT READY
BUT CAN'T GET A JOB.
REFUGEES ARE NOT ALLOWED TO WORK
IN MANY OF THESE COUNTRIES.
WOMEN IF THEY'RE RUNNING AWAY
FROM HOME BY THEMSELVES WITH
THEIR CHILDREN ARE ESPECIALLY
VULNERABLE.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT, RAPE, ALL
KINDS OF PROTECTION ISSUES FOR
WOMEN.
>> OKAY SOMINI SENGUPTA OF THE
NEW YORK TIMES, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE MIDDLE
EAST, ISIS IS REPORTEDLY
PLANTING MINES AND BOMBS AMONG
THE ANCIENT RUINS IN THE SYRIAN
CITY OF PALMYRA.
THE U.K.-BASED SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
SAYS IT IS NOT CLEAR WHETHER
ISIS IS PLANNING TO DESTROY THE
RUINS OR KEEP SYRIAN FORCES OUT
OF THE CITY.
A POSSIBLE SETBACK IN
NEGOTIATIONS OVER IRAN'S NUCLEAR
PROGRAM: IRAN'S PARLIAMENT VOTED
TODAY TO DENY INSPECTORS ANY
ACCESS TO MILITARY SITES.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE LAWMAKERS
ARE DEMANDING COMPLETE REMOVAL
OF ALL ECONOMIC SANCTIONS IN
EXCHANGE FOR ANY NUCLEAR PACT.
THE VOTE HAS NOT BEEN ENACTED
INTO LAW, BUT IT DOES CONTRADICT
A TENTATIVE AGREEMENT IRANIAN
NEGOTIATORS MADE WITH CHINA,
FRANCE, RUSSIA, THE U.K., THE
U.S. AND GERMANY, THAT ALLOWS
FOR SOME INSPECTIONS.
NEGOTIATORS HAVE SET A JUNE 30TH
DEADLINE TO REACH A DEAL.
THEY MEET IN VIENNA NEXT WEEK.
THE NUMBER OF AMERICAN VETERANS
WAIT-LISTED FOR HEALTHCARE
SERVICES IS REPORTEDLY FIFTY
PERCENT HIGHER THAN IT WAS A
YEAR AGO.
IN THE WAKE OF A SCANDAL OVER
FALSE RECORDS AND LONG WAITING
LISTS, THE DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS EXPANDED ITS
PATIENT CAPACITY.
BUT ACCORDING TO THE NEW YORK
TIMES, THE V.A. DID NOT
ANTICIPATE THE DEMAND FOR
MEDICAL CARE WOULD CONTINUE TO
SOAR.
THE V.A. IS ALSO FACING A NEARLY
$3 BILLION BUDGET SHORTFALL.
THE AGENCY IS REPORTEDLY
CONSIDERING FURLOUGHS AND HIRING
FREEZES.
AND IN RURAL VIRGINIA: AN
INFUSION OF FUNDING AND A CHANGE
IN LEADERSHIP COULD KEEP A
HISTORIC PRIVATE WOMEN'S COLLEGE
OPEN, AT LEAST FOR THE NEXT
YEAR.
IN MARCH, SWEET BRIAR COLLEGE
ANNOUNCED IT WOULD SHUT DOWN
AFTER MORE THAN 100 YEARS OF
SERVICE.
BUT GRADUATES COLLECTED
$12 MILLION IN PLEDGES.
LAST NIGHT, THE STATE'S ATTORNEY
GENERAL ANNOUNCED AN AGREEMENT
TO ALLOW THE ALUMNAE TO DONATE
THE MONEY WHILE THE SCHOOL MAKES
SWEEPING CHANGES IN LEADERSHIP.
A JUDGE STILL NEEDS TO APPROVE
THE DETAILS OF THE AGREEMENT.
AS WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT,
CONGREGANTS IN CHURCHES ACROSS
SOUTH CAROLINA ARE PLANNING A
SPECIAL CHURCH SERVICE OUTSIDE
MOTHER EMANUEL THIS EVENING.
THE CHURCH OPENED THIS MORNING
FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE A LONE
GUNMAN SHOT NINE PARISHIONERS
LAST WEEK.
ONE OF THE VICTIMS, CHURCH
PASTOR AND STATE SENATOR
CLEMENTA PINCKNEY WILL LIE IN
STATE IN THE SOUTH CAROLINA
CAPITOL ON WEDNESDAY.
AND THE OWNER OF THE CAROLINA
PANTHERS, JERRY RICHARDSON,
IS OFFERING EACH OF THE VICTIMS'
FAMILIES $10,000 TO HELP COVER
FUNERAL COSTS.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, I'M
HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.